Nextjs quickstart updates for Core 2 (#711)
clerk/clerk-docs: docs/quickstarts/nextjs.mdx

- Set up your environment keys to test your app locally
- Protect your Next.js app's content with Clerk
- Use Next.js middleware to implement route-specific authentication

> - Create a header with Clerk components for users to sign in and out

Reviewer: The "you will learn" section should account for almost every heading/section of this tutorial.

<Tabs type="router" items={["App Router", "Pages Router"]}>
  <Tab>
  <Callout type="info">
    If you are not using `src`, the `app/layout.tsx` file will be in your root folder.
  </Callout>

  ```tsx filename="src/app/layout.tsx" {1,10-14}
  import { ClerkProvider } from '@clerk/nextjs'
  import './globals.css'

  export default function RootLayout({
    children,
  }: {
    children: React.ReactNode
  }) {
    return (
      <ClerkProvider>
        <html lang="en">
          <body>{children}</body>
        </html>
      </ClerkProvider>
    )
  }
  ```
  </Tab>

  <Tab>
  <Callout type="info">
    If you are not using `src`, the `_app.tsx` file will be in your root folder.
  </Callout>

  ```tsx filename="/src/pages/_app.tsx" {2,6-8}
    import '@/styles/globals.css'
    import { ClerkProvider } from "@clerk/nextjs/server";
    import type { AppProps } from "next/app";
    function MyApp({ Component, pageProps }: AppProps) {
      return (
        <ClerkProvider {...pageProps}>
          <Component {...pageProps} />
        </ClerkProvider>
      );
    }
    export default MyApp;
  ```
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

### Add Middleware to your application

> Middleware grants you access to user authentication state throughout your application, on any route or page. With `clerkMiddleware()` offers the capability to protect routes, it does not enforce protection by default. Please see the [`clerkMiddleware()` reference](/docs/references/nextjs/clerk-middleware) and the [Route Protection guide](/docs/references/nextjs/route-protection) for information on protecting routes.

Reviewer: How do we feel about adding this little sentence - so it's super clear:

```suggestion
Middleware grants you access to user authentication state throughout your application, on any route or page. While `clerkMiddleware()` offers the capability to protect routes, it does not enforce protection by default. All routes will be public and you must opt-in to protection. Please see the [`clerkMiddleware()` reference](/docs/references/nextjs/clerk-middleware) and the [Route Protection guide](/docs/references/nextjs/route-protection) for information on protecting routes.

```

or another way that I wrote it is:

By default, `clerkMiddleware()` will not protect any routes. All routes are public and you must opt-in to protection for routes. See the [`clerkMiddleware()` docs](https://github.com/docs/references/nextjs/clerk-middleware) to learn how to require authentication for specific routes. 

---

I just want it to be very clear to users that *all routes are public by default*. Saying routes are "protected" may not be clear to users that "protection" = "requires authentication / requires sign-in"

1. If you don't have a `.env.local` file in the root directory of your Next.js project, create one now.
2. Find your secret key and publishable key. If you're signed into Clerk, the `.env.local` snippet below will contain your both. Otherwise:
  - Navigate to your [Clerk Dashboard](https://dashboard.clerk.com/last-active?path=api-keys).
  - Select your application, then select **🔑 API Keys** in the sidebar menu.
  - You can copy your keys from the **Quick Copy** section.
3. Add your keys to your `.env.local` file. 

The final result should look as follows:

  <InjectKeys>

  ```sh filename=".env.local"
  NEXT_PUBLIC_CLERK_PUBLISHABLE_KEY={{pub_key}}
  CLERK_SECRET_KEY={{secret}}
  ```

>   </InjectKeys>

Reviewer: spacing stuff - I thought we use tabs spacing of 2 😯

        <ClerkProvider {...pageProps}>
          <Component {...pageProps} />
        </ClerkProvider>
      );
    }
    export default MyApp;
    ```

</CodeBlockTabs>

### Add authentication to your app with middleware

Now that Clerk is installed and mounted in your application, you can decide which pages are public and which should require authentication to access:

1. Create a `middleware.ts` file at the root of your project, or in your `src/` directory if you have one.
2. In your middleware.ts, export Clerk's `clerkMiddleware()` helper:
  ```tsx filename="middleware.ts"
  import { clerkMiddleware } from "@clerk/nextjs/server";

  export default clerkMiddleware();

  export const config = {
    matcher: [
      '/((?!.*\\..*|_next).*)', // Don't run middleware on static files
      '/', // Run middleware on index page
      '/(api|trpc)(.*)'
    ], // Run middleware on API routes
  };
  ```
3. By default, `clerkMiddleware()` will not protect any routes. All routes are public and you must opt-in to protection for routes. See the [`clerkMiddleware()` docs](https://github.com/docs/references/nextjs/clerk-middleware) to learn how to require authentication for specific routes.

> ### Try accessing your app

Reviewer: New problem.
Now that we are using clerkMiddleware, all pages are public.
So how does Account Portal work out of the box? The index page doesn't require sign-in, so it's not going to redirect the user to the AP sign-in page...

Select your preferred router below to learn how to make this data available across your entire app:

<CodeBlockTabs type="router" options={["App Router", "Pages Router"]}>
  ```tsx filename="/src/app/layout.tsx" {1,10-14}
  import { ClerkProvider } from '@clerk/nextjs'
  import './globals.css'

  export default function RootLayout({
    children,
  }: {
    children: React.ReactNode
  }) {
    return (        
      <ClerkProvider>
        <html lang="en">
          <body>{children}</body>
        </html>
      </ClerkProvider>
    )
  }
  ```

  ```tsx filename="_app.tsx" {2,6-8}
    import '@/styles/globals.css'
    import { ClerkProvider } from "@clerk/nextjs/server";
    import type { AppProps } from "next/app";
    function MyApp({ Component, pageProps }: AppProps) {
      return (          
        <ClerkProvider {...pageProps}>
          <Component {...pageProps} />
        </ClerkProvider>
      );
    }

>     export default MyApp;

Reviewer: formatting stuff again :/

Author: This is just being applied when I save. It might be a prettier thing of some sort?

1. Create a `middleware.ts` file at the root of your project, or in your `src/` directory if you have one.
2. In your `middleware.ts`, export Clerk's [`clerkMiddleware`](/docs/references/nextjs/clerk-middleware) helper:
  ```tsx filename="middleware.ts"
  import { clerkMiddleware } from "@clerk/nextjs/server";

>   export default clerkMiddleware({});

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  export default clerkMiddleware();

```

  ```
3. With `clerkMiddleware()`, authentication will be enabled by default on all routes that your Next.js middleware runs on, blocking access to all signed out visitors. You can specify valid routes using Next.js's [`matcher`](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/building-your-application/routing/middleware#matcher). Add the following code to your `middleware.ts` to protect your entire application:

  ```tsx filename="middleware.ts" {15}
  import { clerkMiddleware } from "@clerk/nextjs/server";

  export default clerkMiddleware({
    // Routes that can be accessed while signed out
    publicRoutes: ['/anyone-can-visit-this-route'],
    // Routes that can always be accessed, and have
    // no authentication information
    ignoredRoutes: ['/no-auth-in-this-route'],
  });

  export const config = {
    // Protects all routes, including api/trpc.
    // See https://clerk.com/docs/references/nextjs/clerk-middleware
    // for more information about configuring your Middleware
    matcher: ["/((?!.+\\.[\\w]+$|_next).*)", "/", "/(api|trpc)(.*)"],
  };

>   ```

Reviewer: formatting stuff again :/

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I called this out in the main v5 PR where I think these changes were made directly. https://github.com/clerk/clerk-docs/pull/605#issuecomment-1953292508

And no, we 100% do not want to ship this. This is wrong code and wrong info. This could be merged into the v5 branch though and fixed before the v5 docs are shipped.

Reviewer: maybe we can have this section say something like:

1. Create a `middleware.ts` file at the root of your project, or in your `src/` directory if you have one.
2. In your `middleware.ts`, export Clerk's [`clerkMiddleware()`](/docs/references/nextjs/clerk-middleware) helper:
  ```tsx filename="middleware.ts"
  import { clerkMiddleware } from "@clerk/nextjs/server";

  export default clerkMiddleware();

  export const config = {
    matcher: [
      '/((?!.*\\..*|_next).*)', // Don't run middleware on static files
      '/', // Run middleware on index page
      '/(api|trpc)(.*)'
    ], // Run middleware on API routes
  };
  ```
3. By default, `clerkMiddleware` will not protect any routes. All routes are public and you must opt-in to protection for routes. See the [`clerkMiddleware()`](/docs/references/nextjs/clerk-middleware) docs to learn how to require authentication for specific routes.

Reviewer 2: My original version of this, which was merged into the now core2 branch, said something like this.

Reviewer: oh I see it ! but I also think the code in core2 is incorrect? it reads:
```tsx filename="middleware.ts" {15}
    import { clerkMiddleware } from "@clerk/nextjs/server";

    export default clerkMiddleware({
      // Routes that can be accessed while signed out
      publicRoutes: ['/anyone-can-visit-this-route'],
      // Routes that can always be accessed, and have
      // no authentication information
      ignoredRoutes: ['/no-auth-in-this-route'],
    });

    export const config = {
      // Protects all routes, including api/trpc.
      // See https://clerk.com/docs/references/nextjs/clerk-middleware
      // for more information about configuring your Middleware
      matcher: ["/((?!.+\\.[\\w]+$|_next).*)", "/", "/(api|trpc)(.*)"],
    };
```

but does clerkMiddleware use publicRoutes and ignoredRoutes ?

<Callout type="info">

>   See the [`authMiddleware()`](/docs/references/nextjs/auth-middleware#default-behaviour) docs to learn more about `publicRoutes` and `ignoredRoutes`.

Reviewer: once we update the copy about clerkMiddleware, this can get removed.

Access your app to verify that authentication is enabled:

1. Run your project with the following terminal command from the root directory of your project:
  <CodeBlockTabs type="installer" options={["npm", "yarn", "pnpm"]}>
    ```bash filename="terminal"
    npm run dev
    ```

    ```bash filename="terminal"
    yarn dev
    ```

    ```bash filename="terminal"
    pnpm dev
    ```

  </CodeBlockTabs>
2. Visit [`http://localhost:3000`](http://localhost:3000) to access your app. The Middleware will redirect you to your Sign Up page, provided by Clerk's [Account Portal](/docs/account-portal/overview) feature.
3. Sign up to gain access to your application.
4. Log into your new account. You should be able to access it now.

### Create a header with Clerk components

> You can control which content signed in and signed out users can see with Clerk's [prebuilt components](/docs/components/overview). To get started, create a header for your users to sign in or out. To do this, you will use:

Reviewer: try our best to remove the use of "we", and use an active voice to direct users

``` 
</CodeBlockTabs>

Then, visit your app's homepage at [`localhost:3000`](http://localhost:3000) while signed out or signed in to see `<SignInButton />` and `<UserButton />` in action.

> ### Sign out

Reviewer: The previous step tells the user to be signed out to see the `<SignInButton />` or sign in to see the `<UserButton />` - so we aren't sure which state they will be in when they move on to the next step. 
We can either
- remove the section
- reword the last "Sign out" step to say "Finally, sign in to your app at localhost:3000 . Use the UserButton by selecting your avatar, then selecting Sign out". but it seems redundant of the last piece of copy in the previous step (the "Then, visit your app's homepage... to see SignInButton and UserButton"

so I'm not sure if we want to keep this last "Sign out" section or remove it altogether ?

    <Cards title="Next.js SDK Reference" description="Learn more about additional Next.js methods." link="/docs/references/nextjs/overview" cta="Learn More" />

>     <Cards title="Use Clerk with Next.js 12 and older" description="Learn how to use Clerk with older versions of Next.js." link="/docs/references/nextjs/usage-with-older-versions" cta="Learn More" />

Reviewer: we had discussed the removal of this in the previous nextjs quickstart update - basically, I don't believe its a step in a user's journey and therefore, doesn't need to be included in the nextjs quickstart.
